Title: Constitution
status: hidden

# I. Structure of Organization #

The &ldquo;Women in Computer Science Undergraduate Committee&rdquo; is a
subcommittee of the Women in Computer Science Committee, a standing committee
of the Cheriton School of Computer Science. For the remainder of this document,
this standing committee will be referred to as the &ldquo;WiCS
Committee.&rdquo; All references to: &ldquo;the undergraduate committee,&rdquo;
&ldquo;the committee,&rdquo; and &ldquo;committee members&rdquo; refer to the
Undergraduate Committee unless otherwise specified.

## i. Purpose and Vision ##

The undergraduate committee seeks to build a supportive community for cis and
trans women and non-binary individuals in computer science, and to advocate for
the inclusion of these underrepresented groups in the computer science
community at large.

## ii. Representation ##

The Women in Computer Science Undergraduate Committee aims to advocate for and
support undergraduate cis and trans women and non-binary individuals enrolled
in computer science and related undergraduate programs at the University of
Waterloo. Additionally, we seek to advocate on the behalf of, include and
support members of all underrepresented groups in the fields of technology and
computing.

## iii. Values ##

1. *Inclusivity:* The undergraduate commitee is committed to fostering an
   inclusive environment in which women of all backgrounds will feel welcome,
   and to which they can contribute.

2. *Humility:* The committee will acknowledge and respect the perspectives of
   those with experiences different to ours, and will strive to understand and
   incorporate these perspectives.

3. *Respect:* All members of the community will be treated with respect,
   regardless of difference in opinions and values.

4. *Transparency:* As leaders, our actions and decision-making must be visible
   to promote accountability, and all decision-making will be open and
   well-documented within the committee and with the public when possible.

5. *Accountability:* The committee will foster an environment to promote honest
   disclosure and constructive criticism. All community members should feel safe
   to voice their opinions and feelings for the interest of the community. We
   understand that everyone makes mistakes, and we strongly encourage
   acknowledging them, taking responsibility, and working to fix them.

6. *Consensus-building:* Decisions should be made with teamwork and the
   affirmative support of the committee. Committee members will seek feedback on
   their proposals and work to build consensus among the committee before
   bringing decisions to group discussion. Members also commit to providing
   constructive feedback and actively engaging with their peers' ideas.

7. *Technical Excellence:* The committee acknowledges that its fundamental goal
   is to support diversity in technical work, and members will strive to achieve
   growth and excellence in this work themselves and encourage it in others,
   through hard work, mentorship, and curiosity.

# II. Committee Composition #

1.  Only undergraduate cis and trans women and non-binary individuals enrolled
    in computer science or a related undergraduate program may serve on the
    committee. The committee will be comprised of the following members:

    1. Chair

    2. Secretary

    3. Finance Director

    4. Office Manager

    5. Systems Administrator

    6. Big CSters Director

    7. Director of Publicity

    8. Up to three additional positions as necessary, with titles chosen by the
       committee.

2.  The duties of the Chair are:

    1. To chair all meetings;

    2. To publicly represent the committee as the primary contact for external
       groups;

    3. To represent the undergraduate committee at meetings of the WiCS
       Committee;

    4. To represent the undergraduate committee at meetings of any other
       external organization to which the committee is accountable, such as the
       Mathematics Society;

    5. To secure funding for the committee's endeavours in collaboration with
       the Finance Director;

    6. To mediate and resolve internal committee disputes.

3.  The duties of the Secretary are:

    1. To take minutes at all meetings;

    2. To call meetings;

    3. To represent the undergraduate committee at meetings of the WiCS
       Committee;

    4. To track the completion of all duties assigned to members of the
       committee;

    5. To maintain the non-financial records of the committee.

4.  The duties of the Finance Director are:

    1. To process financial paperwork;

    2. To maintain accurate budgets and financial records;

    3. To secure funding for the endeavours of the committee, in
       collaboration with the Chair;

    4. To represent the organization in a financial capacity, in all relevant
       meetings.

5.  The duties of the Office Manager are:

    1. To maintain and uphold the Office Policy;

    2. To train and manage office staff;

    3. To ensure the office is a clean, orderly, and respectful space;

    4. To create and manage the schedule of office hours;

    5. To ensure the office is equipped with adequate supplies.

6.  The duties of the System Administrator are:

    1. To chair the Systems Committee (&ldquo;wics-sys&rdquo;);

    2. To serve as the authority on matters regarding usage of computer systems;

    3. To maintain access control lists for the committee's computing resources,
       including office terminals and servers;

    4. To maintain and enforce the Machine Usage Agreement, dictating
       acceptable use of the committee's computing resources.

7.  The duties of the Big CSters Director are:

    1. To maintain the Big CSters community through supportive and inclusive
       programming, such as workshops and discussion circles;

    2. To lead the Big CSters mentoring program, running no fewer than two
       events per term;

    3. To administer the CSters mailing list.

8.  The duties of the Diretor of Publicity are:

    1. To publicize events and other committee activities through physical and
       electronic means;

    2. To design all media circulated by the committee including: posters,
       social media profiles and the official website.

9.  All committee memebers are free to delegate their responsibilities to others
    as they see fit, but are ultimately responsible for the completion of their
    assigned duties.

10. All committee members are responsible to support their fellow members and
    ensure their assigned duties are being completed. If a member notices that
    a fellow member has fell behind on their responsibilities, the supporting
    member shall:

    1. Reach out to the member who has fallen behind in private, and inquire
       about the responsibility in question. If the member is not comfortable
       reaching out to the member who has fallen behind, they may bring the
       matter to the attention of the Chair or Secretary, who will take over
       the next steps in this procedure;

    2. Offer assistance to the member who has fallen behind, if able. If
       unable, the supporting member, Chair, or Secretary will ask the member
       who has fallen behind to privately seek out help from other committee
       members;

    3. If, after the matter has been discussed privately, the responsibility
       has still not been addressed, the supporting member, Chair, or Secretary
       may bring up the matter to the committee publicly in a closed session
       meeting;

    4. Under the leadership of the Secretary, the committee will discuss
       providing the necessary support to complete the responsibility,
       possibly assigning it to another member. If appropriate, the committee
       will also schedule a post-mortem to evaluate the circumstances leading
       to the reassignment of the duty: perhaps that member's workload was too
       heavy or they were not receiving enough support from other committee
       members.

# III. Procedures #

## i. Policies ##

Any changes to committee policy must be proposed with at least one week's
notice, and ratified at an official meeting of the undergraduate committee.

### 1. Code of Conduct ###

The Code of Conduct (CoC) outlines expected behaviour for all members of the
community at any community venues, online and in-person, and in any
communications pertaining to committee business. Any member of the committee
may propose an amendment to the CoC.

### 2. Machine Usage Agreement ###

The Machine Usage Agreement outlines expected conduct when using any machines
maintained by the undergraduate committee. Any proposed changes must be first
ratified by the Systems Committee, followed by the entire committee.

### 3. Office Policy ###

The Office Policy outlines expected behaviour in the WiCS Undergraduate
Committee office, M3 1003.

### 4. Communication and Organizational Technologies ###

1. A communication or organizational technology is defined as a software
   product that facilitates communication and group organization for completing
   committee work. Examples include GNU Mailman, issue trackers such as
   Bugzilla, and GitHub.

2. Any change to communication or organizational technologies must occur within
   the first three weeks of the term, to minimize workflow disruption.

3. Any change to communication or organizational technologies adopted by the
   committee must be proposed with a minimum of one week of notice, and must be
   adopted by a supermajority: two-thirds of the total number of committee
   members.

4. Any technologies chosen must provide for archival and continuity:

    1. Any activity, communications, or data generated on the platform must be
       available indefinitely for the use of future committees. This may be
       facilitated by logging or data exports. Examples include GNU Mailman's
       archival feature and text-based IRC logs.

    2. If the export is only available in machine-readable format (e.g. JSON or
       XML exports), a tool must be provided to convert it to human-readable
       form. The tool may be provided by a committee member. An example includes
       Elana Hashman's JSON parser for Slack exports.

5. When available, a free and open source software solution that could be
   self-hosted shall be preferred over a publicly-hosted proprietary solution.

6. Individuals may feel free to seek out organizational technologies for their
   personal use, but if they plan to share the technology or onboard other
   committee members with the same technology, they must follow the above
   procedure.

7. A list of currently adopted communication and organizational technologies
   shall be maintained internally by the committee. Technologies adopted by the
   current committee will be used by all following committees, unless changes
   are made through this procedure.

## ii. Succession Procedures ##

1.  No later than the last day of classes of the current term, a call for
    new committee members for the upcoming term shall be announced on the
    website and sent out to all affiliated mailing lists.

2.  *New volunteers* shall be defined as any individual who has never served on
    the committee before, or has not served on the committee in the past four
    terms. They can nominate themselves for positions on the next term's committee
    via the call for new committee members, subject to the following process:

    1. The new volunteer shall fill out an application provided by the call for
       new committee members;

    2. The current committee will then select evaluate the applications
       received and select applicants for interviews;

    3. The current committee will select interviewers. Interviewers should be
       chosen by the current committee, and are expected to disclose any
       conflicts of interest when presented with the list of candidates. If a
       conflict of interest arises, an alternate interviewer shall be chosen.
       In any case, if no interviewer is explicitly chosen and there is no
       conflict of interest, the current Chair shall conduct the interviews;

    4. Interviews are intended to introduce the new volunteer to the
       committee's values, give them background on the committee's activities,
       and evaluate them for a position on the committee for the next term.

    5. Using the applications and interview feedback, the current committee
       will ultimately select the composition of the committee for next term.

3.  *Returning committee members,* who have served on the committee within the
    past four terms, can nominate themselves for positions on the next term's
    committee given the following conditions:

    1. No member may serve more than two consecutive terms;

    2. Members intending to serve as Chair or Secretary must be on a study term
       with no competing full-time commitments, such as a co-op job;

    3. Members intending to serve as the Finance Director, Office Manager,
       or Systems Administrator must be on a study term or working on campus;

    4. Members wishing to nominate themselves for chair should be a previous
       WiCS committee member. If no such volunteer exists, the position opens
       up to new members;

    5. Excluding that of Chair, no positions may be chosen until the first
       official meeting of the new term's committee;

    6. Existing committee members may compose no more than 75% of the new
       committee, if more existing members are nominated than 75% can
       accomodate, each returning member will submit a new application to be
       reviewed by the serving Chair of the WiCS Committee.

4.  If there are any objections to an applicant, this procedure should
    be followed:

    1. The objection will be presented to the committee, with accompanying
       evidence;

    2. The individual in question may present a defense;

    3. The current committee will vote on accepting the individual for the
       upcoming term. If a majority of members uphold the objection, the
       individual will be denied a position on the next term's committee and
       must apply in the future as a new volunteer. Otherwise, they will be
       accepted as a returning member.

    4. An objection can be raised privately to the Chair or Secretary, who will
       bring the case to the committee and determine if the objection requires
       investigation under the the Code of Conduct.

5. Once the committee has been chosen, the Chair of the WiCS Committee must
   ratify the new committeee.

## iii. Standing Committees ##

### 1. Systems Committee ###

The Systems Committee (&ldquo;wics-sys&rdquo;) shall:

1. Be chaired by the Systems Administrator;

2. Consist solely of members appointed by the Systems Administrator;

3. Operate all computing equipment in the possession of the committee;

4. Maintain and upgrade all systems in possession of the committee, including
   office terminals and servers;

5. Maintain the committee's source code repositories and software;

6. Maintain the committee's official website, [wics.uwaterloo.ca](/).

### 2. Other Committees ###

The undergraduate committee can create and task standing committees as
necessary. Such standing committees can be dissolved at any time by the
undergraduate committee.

## iv. Keys ##

1. Keys will be allocated to the undergraduate committeee as per policy set out
   in the Memorandum of Understanding with the Mathematics Society;

2. The Office Manager and Systems Administrator will both receive keys.
   Remaining keys will be allocated as the undergraduate committee sees fit.

## v. Holding Committee Meetings ##

1.  The Secretary is tasked with calling meetings;

2.  Meetings should be held weekly and must occur biweekly;

3.  Meetings must be announced with at least 48 hours of notice;

4.  If the Secretary does not schedule a meeting within a two-week period, any
    committee member may call a meeting;

5.  Two types of meetings may be called:

    1. *Open Session:* This type of meeting is open to all committee members,
       and guests by invitation only. In order to invite guests, a member must
       give the committee notice before the meeting officially starts.

    2. *Closed Session:* These meetings are open only to committee members and
       individuals unanimously invited by the committee. Any committee member
       may call a closed session meeting. Internal discipline, Code of Conduct
       violations, and funding proposals must be discussed in a closed session
       meeting.

# IV. Procedure for Amending This Document #

1.  Any committee member may propose a change;

2.  Changes must be proposed with at least two weeks of notice.

# V. Acceptable Use of Committee Resources #

1.  All resources under control of the committee are to be used in accordance
    with the aims of the committee, including but not limited to office space,
    computing resources, and resources provided through events.

2.  The Chair and Secretary are jointly responsible for the proper use of all
    committee resources, except as otherwise specified by committee decisions or
    this document.

3.  The Systems Administrator is responsible for the proper use of
    administrative access to committee computing resources.

4.  The Systems Committee, in liaison with the committee, is responsible for
    the proper use of all committee computing resources.

5.  The Office Manager is reponsible for the proper use of all office
    resources.

6.  Permission to use a resource is automatically granted to someone
    responsible for that resource, and optionally as determined by those
    responsible for a resource. Granting permission to someone to use a resource
    does not make that person responsible for the proper use of the resource,
    although the user is responsible to the person granting permission.
